### Business Understanding:
Second-hand or used car vehicle data can be used by car dealerships to understand what are the critical features that drive the price of cars. Once identified, these important features could be used effectively to drive or forecast the price of used vehicles. Thus it is imperative that used car dealerships have the right data inventory with desired features so that they can set competitive prices and drive sales.

### Data Understanding:
There are 18 different fields/features in the dataset. So, the first step is to see which features may have strong correlation to price. We notice that there are just 4 numerical fields (id, price, year and odometer)  and none of them seem to show strong correlation. We also notice that there are a large number of null values in the dataset. So, we need to check which of these values can be gleaned and which are relevant for our analysis. For example, records that have null values for price have no relevance for analysis. Similarly, VIN and id do not have much relevance to price. Odometer and year of manufacture are important parameters, so null values in them cannot be used for our analysis. Also, a histogram with the entire dataset shows that bulk of the data is post 1990 and earlier vehicle data may be more like outliers. 

### Exploratory Data Analysis & Data Preparation:
For some of the categorical data (eg, condition, fuel, title_status, transmission, type) that had null values, analyze the median values and assume that median value for null value records. For other categorical features (eg, cylinders, drive, size) which may have significant impact on car prices, if there are null values, the records may be removed. Additional data analysis by car type shows that pickup has the highest price-point and variance. Similar analysis by drive, cylinders, manufacture and size showed ones which have higher impact on price. Based on the above assumptions, the data is cleaned and prepared for analysis. Considered data greater than 1995 and removed records that still had null values in any of the features. Recalibrated the correlation matrix and it showed price is negatively correlated with age and odometer reading while positively correlated with number of cylinders.   

### Modeling & Evaluation:
Employed Linear Regression, Ridge Regression, Cross Validation model and all of them clearly showed that odometer reading, age and number of cylinders had the strongest impact on price. Additional features like - automatic_transmission, fuel_gas, drive_fwd which have negative correlation with price seem to have almost similar MSE with fuel_diesel, transmission_other, drive_4wd. While a buyer may prefer automatic transmission or fuel_gas, the data do not provide sufficient confidence on the impact on price for these features. Hence, I would recommend collecting more data that correlated more with price. Since few of the columns lended themselves to one hot encoding it created many columns that were less than ideal for processing and predicting prices. A smaller subset of highly correlated features would have lended better results. Sometimes demand for certain types of vehicles drive the price of cars. However, this dataset does not provide any information of demand except that certain manufacture, size and type of cars have more availability and price variance than others. So, for a more thorough recommendation - additional datasets about customer preference when coming to inquire about used cars when matched with inventory on hand could help ascertain the cars that would sell and the prices. The dealers can then have those types, size and manufacture available in inventory for which they can demand higher prices leading to higher sales and profit. This would be essential in making suggestions to used car dealers that are limited with the current dataset.

### Deployment: 
a. The most important factor that determines the price of used vehicles is odometer readings. Price decreases with increasing age and higher odometer readings. There is an inverse relation between vehicle year and odometer.

b. The model also indicates that vehicles with higher number of cylinders (that is having higher power), have higher value over economy vehicles with lower power rank lower leading to a decrease in vehicle's resale value.

c. Other features that influence car price - fuel, drive and transmission. For example, fuel_diesel, transmission_other, drive_4wd positively influence higher price while fuel_gas, transmission_automatic, drive_fwd could drive down prices (as these are commonly available among most vehicles).

d. Additional datasets about customer preference and demand when matched with inventory on hand could help ascertain which cars are more likely to sell driving revenue and profit. The dealers can keep track of features like car types, sizes and manufacture that customers demand so that keeping that in inventory will ensure faster sales and profits.

e. We recommend further examination of the regression model to check for trends by region, make/model of car, car types and color. These features were not used in the regression.
