Business Understanding

In this decade, when climate change and rising global temperatures has a huge impact on planet earth (melting glaciers, rising sea levels and intense heat waves), this project is aimed at gaining a greater understanding of how the temperatures changed over the past 50 years. Using the global average temperature data (both from land and sea) from 1743 to 2013 to analyze any trend, seasonality or cyclicality. Which years had the highest increase in temperature in the last few years ? What was the min, max and variance ? Based on past years data, could we predict temperature for future years?
Data Understanding In order to answer the business question, am using the data from kaggle that has the temperature data on a monthly basis from 1750 and the following features. The data needs to be cleansed and transformed to be used in the analysis.
Data Features Date: starts in 1750 for average land temperature and 1850 for max and min land temperatures and global ocean and land temperatures LandAverageTemperature: global average land temperature in celsius LandAverageTemperatureUncertainty: the 95% confidence interval around the average LandMaxTemperature: global average maximum land temperature in celsius LandMaxTemperatureUncertainty: the 95% confidence interval around the maximum land temperature LandMinTemperature: global average minimum land temperature in celsius LandMinTemperatureUncertainty: the 95% confidence interval around the minimum land temperature LandAndOceanAverageTemperature: global average land and ocean temperature in celsius LandAndOceanAverageTemperatureUncertainty: the 95% confidence interval around the global average land and ocean temperature
Exploratory Data Analysis Dataset has all numerical values. High Correlation exist among all the variables: LandAverageTemperature to LandMaxTemperature, LandMinTemperature, LandAndOceanAverageTemperature. So, clearly high correlation exists among the average, min, max and uncertainty values of land and ocean which are plotted.
Data Preparation Data was investigated for missing values and noted null data in many of the columns above including the main variable LandAverageTemperature. Also, null values are noted in rows before 1850. For the purpose of analysis, that data may not be much helpful in predicting future temperatures. Hence, removed from the data set. All monthly data from 1850 was used for further analysis and preparation.
Since the data is provided at a monthly level, we checked to see if the LandAveragetemperatures show seasonality and if we need to make special adjustments with that. Plotting it showed that the temperatures increased consistently across all the months of the year (increasing trend). So, if we take the average temperature for the year, that would be helpful for us to predict future temperatures and use in regression analysis.
Then checked how the key features LandAverageTemperature, LandMaxTemperature, LandMinTemperature and LandAndOceanTemperature trend over time (across centuries). It was observed that all the features show similar trends over the years. So, if the yearly LandAverageTemperature is used, it can be helpful for predicting future temperatures. Also, checked on seasonality and cyclical nature of the data using LandAverageTemperature.
The land average temperature was plotted over the years and a straight line as fitted using linear regression. However, it was noted that the land average temperature increased significantly from 1960 onwards and hence a straight regression line cannot be used for predicting the future temperatures from 1850. Replotted the above graph using lowess and see that the trend line curves upwards from 1960 onwards. Hence, for the purpose of final dataset, yearly data from 1960 onwards will be used for linear and logistic regression analysis.
In order to analyze and categorize the data, it is important to find the temperature changes y-o-y and see which years had the highest increase or decrease. Used logistic regression to test yearly temperature difference - increased, decreased or was just average. However, logistic regression classification gave a rather low accuracy of 55.8%. I eyeballed the plot and saw that most of the data points were between -0.2, and 0.2. After that assumption, I decided to test it using some if-else statements, showing me a result where 106(around 64%) of those data points fell between -0.2 and +0.2, while there were 30 below -0.2, and 30 above +0.2. Therefore, I declared those ranges, low increase, average increase, and high increase, coloring them green, yellow, and red respectively.

Modeling: The main objective of this project was to see if we could use past temperatures to predict the future. So, used a linear regression model with data from 1960 onwards to predict the LandAverageTemperature till 2027. It produced a straight line with increasing trend. However, compared to the actual, we noticed from 2000 onwards, the actual temperatures were more than the predicted. With an accuracy score of 0.76, RMSE of 0.20, MAE of 0.16 and MSE of 0.04, the linear regression model seemed to have some limitations.

Used an alternate model using RandomForest to see if it could predict with better accuracy. It turns out that this model produced a much more accurate trendline with an accuracy score of 0.82, RMSE of 0.17, MAE of 0.15 and MSE of 0.03.

Findings and next steps: The approach above could be useful for predicting Average temperatures at the country, state or city level. However, it was noted that in the last few years since 2000, the actual temperatures have been quite erratic - so yearly data for the last 50 years may not be a good indicator of future temperatures. We may just need to consider past 2-5 years monthly data and run the analysis again to increase higher accuracy and yield better predictions.   
